\hypertarget{headerContainer}{}
\hypertarget{navigationHeader}{}
\protect\hypertarget{headerprevious}{}{←\href{/wiki/My_Bondage_and_My_Freedom_(1855)/Chapter_IX}{Chapter
IX}}

\textbf{\protect\hypertarget{header_title_text}{}{\href{/wiki/My_Bondage_and_My_Freedom_(1855)}{My
Bondage and My Freedom}}} ~(1855)~ \emph{by
\href{/wiki/Author:Frederick_Douglass}{\protect\hypertarget{header_author_text}{}{{Frederick
Douglass}}}}\\
\protect\hypertarget{header_section_text}{}{Chapter X}

\protect\hypertarget{headernext}{}{\href{/wiki/My_Bondage_and_My_Freedom_(1855)/Chapter_XI}{Chapter
XI}→}

\hypertarget{navigationNotes}{}

\hypertarget{ws-data}{}
\protect\hypertarget{ws-article-id}{}{2335641}\protect\hypertarget{ws-title}{}{\href{/wiki/My_Bondage_and_My_Freedom_(1855)}{My
Bondage and My Freedom} --- \emph{Chapter
X}}\protect\hypertarget{ws-author}{}{Frederick
Douglass}\protect\hypertarget{ws-year}{}{1855}

{\protect\hypertarget{141}{}{}}

~

{CHAPTER X.}

LIFE IN BALTIMORE.

{CITY ANNOYANCES---PLANTATION REGRETS---MY MISTRESS, MISS SOPHA---HER
HISTORY---HER KINDNESS TO ME---MY MASTER, HUGH AULD---HIS SOURNESS---MY
INCREASED SENSITIVENESS---MY COMFORTS---MY OCCUPATION---THE BANEFUL
EFFECTS OF SLAVEHOLDING ON MY DEAR AND GOOD MISTRESS---HOW SHE COMMENCED
TEACHING ME TO READ---WHY SHE CEASED TEACHING ME---CLOUDS GATHERING OVER
MY BRIGHT PROSPECTS---MASTER AULD'S EXPOSITION OF THE TRUE PHILOSOPHY OF
SLAVERY---CITY SLAVES---PLANTATION SLAVES---THE
CONTRAST---EXCEPTIONS---MR. HAMILTON'S TWO SLAVES, HENRIETTA AND
MARY---MRS. HAMILTON'S CRUEL TREATMENT OF THEM---THE PITEOUS ASPECT THEY
PRESENTED---NO POWER MUST COME BETWEEN THE SLAVE AND THE SLAVEHOLDER.}

\textsc{Once} in Baltimore, with hard brick pavements under my feet,
which almost raised blisters, by their very heat, for it was in the
height of summer; walled in on all sides by towering brick buildings;
with troops of hostile boys ready to pounce upon me at every street
corner; with new and strange objects glaring upon me at every step, and
with startling sounds reaching my ears from all directions, I for a time
thought that, after all, the home plantation was a more desirable place
of residence than my home on Alliciana street, in Baltimore. My country
eyes and ears were confused and bewildered here; but the boys were my
chief trouble. They chased me, and called me "\emph{Eastern Shore man},"
till really I almost wished myself back on the Eastern Shore. I had to
undergo a sort {\protect\hypertarget{142}{}{}}of moral acclimation, and
when that was over, I did much better. My new mistress happily proved to
be all she \emph{seemed} to be, when, with her husband, she met me at
the door, with a most beaming, benignant countenance. She was,
naturally, of an excellent disposition, kind, gentle and cheerful. The
supercilious contempt for the rights and feelings of the slave, and the
petulance and bad humor which generally characterize slaveholding
ladies, were all quite absent from kind ``Miss'' Sophia's manner and
bearing toward me. She had, in truth, never been a slaveholder, but
had---a thing quite unusual in the south---depended almost entirely upon
her own industry for a living. To this fact the dear lady, no doubt,
owed the excellent preservation of her natural goodness of heart, for
slavery can change a saint into a sinner, and an angel into a demon. I
hardly knew how to behave toward ``Miss Sopha,'' as I used to call Mrs.
Hugh Auld. I had been treated as a \emph{pig} on the plantation; I was
treated as a \emph{child} now. I could not even approach her as I had
formerly approached Mrs. Thomas Auld. How could I hang down my head, and
speak with bated breath, when there was no pride to scorn me, no
coldness to repel me, and no hatred to inspire me with fear? I therefore
soon learned to regard her as something more akin to a mother, than a
slaveholding mistress. The crouching servility of a slave, usually so
acceptable a quality to the haughty slaveholder, was not understood nor
desired by this gentle woman. So far from deeming it impudent in a slave
to look her straight in the face, as some slaveholding ladies do, she
seemed ever to say, "look up, {\protect\hypertarget{143}{}{}}child;
don't be afraid; see, I am full of kindness and good will toward you."
The hands belonging to Col. Lloyd's sloop, esteemed it a great privilege
to be the bearers of parcels or messages to my new mistress; for
whenever they came, they were sure of a most kind and pleasant
reception. If little Thomas was her son, and her most dearly beloved
child, she, for a time, at least, made me something like his
half-brother in her affections. If dear Tommy was exalted to a place on
his mother's knee, ``Feddy'' was honored by a place at his mother's
side. Nor did he lack the caressing strokes of her gentle hand, to
convince him that, though \emph{motherless,} he was not
\emph{friendless.} Mrs. Auld was not only a kind-hearted woman, but she
was remarkably pious; frequent in her attendance of public worship, much
given to reading the bible, and to chanting hymns of praise, when alone.
Mr. Hugh Auld was altogether a different character. He cared very little
about religion, knew more of the world, and was more of the world, than
his wife. He set out, doubtless, to be---as the world goes---a
respectable man, and to get on by becoming a successful ship builder, in
that city of ship building. This was his ambition, and it fully occupied
him. I was, of course, of very little consequence to him, compared with
what I was to good Mrs. Auld; and, when he smiled upon me, as he
sometimes did, the smile was borrowed from his lovely wife, and, like
all borrowed light, was transient, and vanished with the source whence
it was derived. While I must characterize Master Hugh as being a very
sour man, and of forbidding appearance, it is due to him to acknowledge,
that he was never {\protect\hypertarget{144}{}{}}very cruel to me,
according to the notion of cruelty in Maryland. The first year or two
which I spent in his house, he left me almost exclusively to the
management of his wife. She was my law-giver. In hands so tender as
hers, and in the absence of the cruelties of the plantation, I became,
both physically and mentally, much more sensitive to good and ill
treatment; and, perhaps, suffered more from a frown from my mistress,
than I formerly did from a cuff at the hands of Aunt Katy. Instead of
the cold, damp floor of my old master's kitchen, I found myself on
carpets; for the corn bag in winter, I now had a good straw bed, well
furnished with covers; for the coarse corn-meal in the morning, I now
had good bread, and mush occasionally; for my poor tow-linen shirt,
reaching to my knees, I had good, clean clothes. I was really well off.
My employment was to run of errands, and to take care of Tommy; to
prevent his getting in the way of carriages, and to keep him out of
harm's way generally. Tommy, and I, and his mother, got on swimmingly
together, for a time. I say \emph{for a time,} because the fatal poison
of irresponsible power, and the natural influence of slavery customs,
were not long in making a suitable impression on the gentle and loving
disposition of my excellent mistress. At first, Mrs. Auld evidently
regarded me simply as a child, like any other child; she had not come to
regard me as \emph{property.} This latter thought was a thing of
conventional growth. The first was natural and spontaneous. A noble
nature, like hers, could not, instantly, be wholly perverted; and it
took several years to change the natural sweetness of her
{\protect\hypertarget{145}{}{}}temper into fretful bitterness. In her
worst estate, however, there were, during the first seven years I lived
with her, occasional returns of her former kindly disposition.

The frequent hearing of my mistress reading the bible---for she often
read aloud when her husband was absent---soon awakened my curiosity in
respect to this \emph{mystery} of reading, and roused in me the desire
to learn. Having no fear of my kind mistress before my eyes, (she had
then given me no reason to fear,) I frankly asked her to teach me to
read; and, without hesitation, the dear woman began the task, and very
soon, by her assistance, I was master of the alphabet, and could spell
words of three or four letters. My mistress seemed almost as proud of my
progress, as if I had been her own child; and, supposing that her
husband would be as well pleased, she made no secret of what she was
doing for me. Indeed, she exultingly told him of the aptness of her
pupil, of her intention to persevere in teaching me, and of the duty
which she felt it to teach me, at least to read \emph{the bible.} Here
arose the first cloud over my Baltimore prospects, the precursor of
drenching rains and chilling blasts.

Master Hugh was amazed at the simplicity of his spouse, and, probably
for the first time, he unfolded to her the true philosophy of slavery,
and the peculiar rules necessary to be observed by masters and
mistresses, in the management of their human chattels. Mr. Auld promptly
forbade the continuance of her instruction; telling her, in the first
place, that the thing itself was unlawful; that it was also unsafe, and
could only lead to mischief. To use his own words,
{\protect\hypertarget{146}{}{}}further, he said, ``if you give a nigger
an inch, he will take an ell;'' ``he should know nothing but the will of
his master, and learn to obey it.'' ``Learning would spoil the best
nigger in the world;'' ``if you teach that nigger---speaking of
myself---how to read the bible, there will be no keeping him;'' ``it
would forever unfit him for the duties of a slave;'' and ``as to
himself, learning would do him no good, but probably, a great deal of
harm---making him disconsolate and unhappy.'' ``If you learn him now to
read, he'll want to know how to write; and, this accomplished, he'll be
running away with himself.'' Such was the tenor of Master Hugh's
oracular exposition of the true philosophy of training a human chattel;
and it must be confessed that he very clearly comprehended the nature
and the requirements of the relation of master and slave. His discourse
was the first decidedly antislavery lecture to which it had been my lot
to listen. Mrs. Auld evidently felt the force of his remarks; and, like
an obedient wife, began to shape her course in the direction indicated
by her husband. The effect of his words, \emph{on me}, was neither
slight nor transitory. His iron sentences---cold and harsh---sunk deep
into my heart, and stirred up not only my feelings into a sort of
rebellion, but awakened within me a slumbering train of vital thought.
It was a new and special revelation, dispelling a painful mystery,
against which my youthful understanding had struggled, and struggled in
vain, to wit: the \emph{white} man's power to perpetuate the enslavement
of the \emph{black} man. ``Very well,'' thought I; ``knowledge unfits a
child to be a slave.'' I instinctively assented to the proposition;
{\protect\hypertarget{147}{}{}}and from that moment I understood the
direct pathway from slavery to freedom. This was just what I needed; and
I got it at a time, and from a source whence I least expected it. I was
saddened at the thought of losing the assistance of my kind mistress;
but the information, so instantly derived, to some extent compensated me
for the loss I had sustained in this direction. Wise as Mr. Auld was, he
evidently underrated my comprehension, and had little idea of the use to
which I was capable of putting the impressive lesson he was giving to
his wife. \emph{He} wanted me to be \emph{a slave;} I had already voted
against that on the home plantation of Col. Lloyd. That which he most
loved I most hated; and the very determination which he expressed to
keep me in ignorance, only rendered me the more resolute in seeking
intelligence. In learning to read, therefore, I am not sure that I do
not owe quite as much to the opposition of my master, as to the kindly
assistance of my amiable mistress. I acknowledge the benefit rendered me
by the one, and by the other; believing, that but for my mistress, I
might have grown up in ignorance.

I had resided but a short time in Baltimore, before I observed a marked
difference in the manner of treating slaves, generally, from that which
I had witnessed in that isolated and out-of-the-way part of the country
where I began life. A city slave is almost a free citizen, in Baltimore,
compared with a slave on Col. Lloyd's plantation. He is much better fed
and clothed, is less dejected in his appearance, and enjoys privileges
altogether unknown to the whip-driven slave on the plantation. Slavery
dislikes a dense {\protect\hypertarget{148}{}{}}population, in which
there is a majority of non-slaveholders. The general sense of decency
that must pervade such a population, does much to check and prevent
those outbreaks of atrocious cruelty, and those dark crimes without a
name, almost openly perpetrated on the plantation. He is a desperate
slaveholder who will shock the humanity of his non-slaveholding
neighbors, by the cries of the lacerated slaves; and very few in the
city are willing to incur the odium of being cruel masters. I found, in
Baltimore, that no man was more odious to the white, as well as to the
colored people, than he, who had the reputation of starving his slaves.
Work them, flog them, if need be, but don't starve them. There are,
however, some painful exceptions to this rule. While it is quite true
that most of the slaveholders in Baltimore feed and clothe their slaves
well, there are others who keep up their country cruelties in the city.

An instance of this sort is furnished in the case of a family who lived
directly opposite to our house, and were named Hamilton. Mrs. Hamilton
owned two slaves. Their names were Henrietta and Mary. They had always
been house slaves. One was aged about twenty-two, and the other about
fourteen. They were a fragile couple by nature, and the treatment they
received was enough to break down the constitution of a horse. Of all
the dejected, emaciated, mangled and excoriated creatures I ever saw,
those two girls---in the refined, church going and Christian city of
Baltimore---were the most deplorable. Of stone must that heart be made,
that could look upon Henrietta and Mary, without being
{\protect\hypertarget{149}{}{}}sickened to the core with sadness.
Especially was Mary a heart-sickening object. Her head, neck and
shoulders, were literally cut to pieces. I have frequently felt her
head, and found it nearly covered over with festering sores, caused by
the lash of her cruel mistress. I do not know that her master ever
whipped her, but I have often been an eye witness of the revolting and
brutal inflictions by Mrs. Hamilton; and what lends a deeper shade to
this woman's conduct, is the fact, that, almost in the very moments of
her shocking outrages of humanity and decency, she would charm you by
the sweetness of her voice and her seeming piety. She used to sit in a
large rocking chair, near the middle of the room, with a heavy cowskin,
such as I have elsewhere described; and I speak within the truth when I
say, that those girls seldom passed that chair, during the day, without
a blow from that cowskin, either upon their bare arms, or upon their
shoulders. As they passed her, she would draw her cowskin and give them
a blow, saying, "\emph{move faster, you black jip!}" and, again,
"\emph{take that, you black jip!}" continuing, "\emph{if you don't move
faster, I will give you more.}" Then the lady would go on, singing her
sweet hymns, as though her \emph{righteous} soul were sighing for the
holy realms of paradise.

Added to the cruel lashings to which these poor slave-girls were
subjected---enough in themselves to crush the spirit of men---they were,
really, kept nearly half starved; they seldom knew what it was to eat a
full meal, except when they got it in the kitchens of neighbors, less
mean and stingy than the {\protect\hypertarget{150}{}{}}psalm-singing
Mrs. Hamilton. I have seen poor Mary contending for the offal, with the
pigs in the street. So much was the poor girl pinched, kicked, cut and
pecked to pieces, that the boys in the street knew her only by the name
of "\emph{pecked}," a name derived from the scars and blotches on her
neck, head and shoulders.

It is some relief to this picture of slavery in Baltimore, to say---what
is but the simple truth---that Mrs. Hamilton's treatment of her slaves
was generally condemned, as disgraceful and shocking; but while I say
this, it must also be remembered, that the very parties who censured the
cruelty of Mrs. Hamilton, would have condemned and promptly punished any
attempt to interfere with Mrs. Hamilton's \emph{right} to cut and slash
her slaves to pieces. There must be no force between the slave and the
slaveholder, to restrain the power of the one, and protect the weakness
of the other; and the cruelty of Mrs. Hamilton is as justly chargeable
to the upholders of the slave system, as drunkenness is chargeable on
those who, by precept and example, or by indifference, uphold the
drinking system.
