{}

~

{CHAPTER XX.}

APPRENTICESHIP LIFE.

{NOTHING LOST BY THE ATTEMPT TO RUN AWAY---COMRADES IN THEIR OLD
HOMES---REASONS FOR SENDING AUTHOR AWAY---RETURN TO BALTIMORE---CONTRAST
BETWEEN ``TOMMY'' AND THAT OF HIS COLORED COMPANION---TRIALS IN
GARDINER'S SHIP YARD---DESPERATE FIGHT---ITS CAUSES CONFLICT BETWEEN
WHITE AND BLACK LABOR---DESCRIPTION OF THE OUTRAGE---COLORED TESTIMONY
NOTHING---CONDUCT OF MASTER HUGH---SPIRIT OF SLAVERY IN
BALTIMORE---AUTHOR'S CONDITION IMPROVES---NEW
ASSOCIATIONS---SLAVEHOLDERS' RIGHT TO TAKE HIS WAGES---HOW TO MAKE A
CONTENTED SLAVE.}

\textsc{Well!} dear reader, I am not, as you may have already inferred,
a loser by the general upstir, described in the foregoing chapter. The
little domestic revolution, notwithstanding the sudden snub it got by
the treachery of somebody---I dare not say or think \emph{who}---did
not, after all, end so disastrously, as, when in the iron cage at
Easton, I conceived it would. The prospect, from that point, did look
about as dark as any that ever cast its gloom over the vision of the
anxious, out-looking, human spirit. ``All is well that ends well.'' My
affectionate comrades, Henry and John Harris, are still with Mr. William
Freeland. Charles Roberts and Henry Baily are safe at their homes. I
have not, therefore, any thing to regret on their account. Their masters
have mercifully forgiven them, probably on the ground suggested in the
spirited little speech of Mrs. Freeland, made tome just before {}leaving
for the jail---namely: that they had been allured into the wicked scheme
of making their escape, by me; and that, but for me, they would never
have dreamed of a thing so shocking! My friends had nothing to regret,
either; for while they were watched more closely on account of what had
happened, they were, doubtless, treated more kindly than before, and got
new assurances that they would be legally emancipated, some day,
provided their behavior should make them deserving, from that time
forward. Not a blow, as I learned, was struck any one of them. As for
Master William Freeland, good, unsuspecting soul, he did not believe
that we were intending to run away at all. Having given---as he
thought---no occasion to his boys to leave him, he could not think it
probable that they had entertained a design so grievous. This, however,
was not the view taken of the matter by ``Mas' Billy,'' as we used to
call the soft spoken, but crafty and resolute Mr. William Hamilton. He
had no doubt that the crime had been meditated; and regarding me as the
instigator of it, he frankly told Master Thomas that he must remove me
from that neighborhood, or he would shoot me down. He would not have one
so dangerous as ``Frederick'' tampering with his slaves. William
Hamilton was not a man whose threat might be safely disregarded. I have
no doubt that he would have proved as good as his word, had the warning
given not been promptly taken. He was furious at the thought of such a
piece of high-handed \emph{theft}, as we were about to perpetrate---the
stealing of our own bodies and souls! The feasibility of the plan, too,
{}could the first steps have been taken, was marvelously plain. Besides,
this was a \emph{new} idea, this use of the bay. Slaves escaping, until
now, had taken to the woods; they had never dreamed of profaning and
abusing the waters of the noble Chesapeake, by making them the highway
from slavery to freedom. Here was a broad road of destruction to
slavery, which, before, had been looked upon as a wall of security by
slaveholders. But Master Billy could not get Mr. Freeland to see matters
precisely as he did; nor could he get Master Thomas so excited as he was
himself. The latter---I must say it to his credit---showed much humane
feeling in his part of the transaction, and atoned for much that had
been harsh, cruel and unreasonable in his former treatment of me and
others. His clemency was quite unusual and unlocked for. ``Cousin Tom''
told me that while I was in jail, Master Thomas was very unhappy; and
that the night before his going up to release me, he had walked the
floor nearly all night, evincing great distress; that very tempting
offers had been made to him, by the negro-traders, but he had rejected
them all, saying that \emph{money could not tempt him to sell me to the
far south}. All this I can easily believe, for he seemed quite reluctant
to send me away, at all. He told me that he only consented to do so,
because of the very strong prejudice against me in the neighborhood, and
that he feared for my safety if I remained there.

Thus, after three years spent in the country, roughing it in the field,
and experiencing all sorts of hardships, I was again permitted to return
to Baltimore, the very place, of all others, short of a free state,
where I {}most desired to live. The three years spent in the country,
had made some difference in me, and in the household of Master Hugh.
``Little Tommy'' was no longer \emph{little} Tommy; and I was not the
slender lad who had left for the Eastern Shore just three years before.
The loving relations between me and Mas' Tommy were broken up. He was no
longer dependent on me for protection, but felt himself a \emph{man},
with other and more suitable associates. In childhood, he scarcely
considered me inferior to himself---certainly, as good as any other boy
with whom he played; but the time had come when his \emph{friend} must
become his \emph{slave}. So we were cold, and we parted. It was a sad
thing to me, that, loving each other as we had done, we must now take
different roads. To him, a thousand avenues were open. Education had
made him acquainted with all the treasures of the world, and liberty had
flung open the gates thereunto; but I, who had attended him seven years,
and had watched over him with the care of a big brother, fighting his
battles in the street, and shielding him from harm, to an extent which
had induced his mother to say, ``Oh! Tommy is always safe, when he is
with Freddy,'' must be confined to a single condition. He could grow,
and become a \textsc{man}; I could grow, though I could \emph{not}
become a man, but must remain, all my life, a minor---a mere boy. Thomas
Auld, junior, obtained a situation on board the brig Tweed, and went to
sea. I know not what has become of him; he certainly has my good wishes
for his welfare and prosperity. There were few persons to whom I was
more sincerely attached {}than to him, and there are few in the world I
would be more pleased to meet.

Very soon after I went to Baltimore to live, Master Hugh succeeded in
getting me hired to Mr. "William Gardiner, an extensive ship builder on
Fell's Point. I was placed here to learn to calk, a trade of which I
already had some knowledge, gained while in Mr. Hugh Auld's ship-yard,
when he was a master builder. Gardiner's, however, proved a very
unfavorable place for the accomplishment of that object. Mr. Gardiner
was, that season, engaged in building two large man-of-war vessels,
professedly for the Mexican government. These vessels were to be
launched in the month of July, of that year, and, in failure thereof,
Mr. G. would forfeit a very considerable sum of money. So, when I
entered the ship-yard, all was hurry and driving. There were in the yard
about one hundred men; of these about seventy or eighty were regular
carpenters---privileged men. Speaking of my condition here, I wrote,
years ago---and I have now no reason to vary the picture---as follows:

{``There was no time to learn any thing. Every man had to do that which
he knew how to do. In entering the ship-yard, my orders from Mr.
Gardiner were, to do whatever the carpenters commanded me to do. This
was placing me at the beck and call of about seventy-five men. I was to
regard all these as masters. Their word was to be my law. My situation
was a most trying one. At times I needed a dozen pair of hands. I was
called a dozen ways in the space of a single minute. Three or four
voices would strike my ear at the same moment. It was---'Fred., come
help me to cant this timber here.''---Fred., come carry this timber
yonder.'---} {}{`Fred., bring that roller here.'---'Fred., go get a
fresh can of water.`---'Fred., come help saw off the end of this
timber.'---'Fred., go quick and get the crowbar.`---'Fred., hold on the
end of this fall.'---'Fred., go the blacksmith's shop, and get a new
`punch.'---'Hurra, Fred.! run and bring me a cold chisel.`---'I say,
Fred., bear a hand, and get up a fire as quick as lightning under that
steam-box.'---'Halloo, nigger! come, turn this grindstone.'---'Come,
come! move, move! and \emph{bowse} this timber forward.`---'I say,
darkey, blast your eyes, why don't you heat up some pitch?'---'Halloo!
halloo! halloo!' (Three voices at the same time.) `Come here!---Go
there!---Hold on where you are! D---n you, if you move, I'll knock your
brains out!"'}

Such, dear reader, is a glance at the school which was mine, during the
first eight months of my stay at Baltimore. At the end of eight months,
Master Hugh refused longer to allow me to remain with Mr. Gardiner. The
circumstance which led to his taking me away, was a brutal outrage,
committed upon me by the white apprentices of the ship-yard. The fight
was a desperate one, and I came out of it most shockingly mangled. I was
cut and bruised in sundry places, and my left eye was nearly knocked out
of its socket. The facts, leading to this barbarous outrage upon me,
illustrate a phase of slavery destined to become an important element in
the overthrow of the slave system, and I may, therefore state them with
some minuteness. That phase is this: \emph{the conflict of slavery with
the interests of the white mechanics and laborers of the south}. In the
country, this conflict is not so apparent; but, in cities, such as
Baltimore, Richmond, New Orleans, Mobile, \&c., it is seen pretty
clearly. The slaveholders, with a craftiness peculiar {}to themselves,
by encouraging the enmity of the poor, laboring white man against the
blacks, succeeds in making the said white man almost as much a slave as
the black slave himself. The difference between the white slave, and the
black slave, is this: the latter belongs to \emph{one} slaveholder, and
the former belongs to \emph{all} the slaveholders, collectively. The
white slave has taken from him, by indirection, what the black slave has
taken from him, directly, and without ceremony. Both are plundered, and
by the same plunderers. The slave is robbed, by his master, of all his
earnings, above what is required for his bare physical necessities; and
the white man is robbed by the slave system, of the just results of his
labor, because he is flung into competition with a class of laborers who
work without wages. The competition, and its injurious consequences,
will, one day, array the non-slaveholding white people of the slave
states, against the slave system, and make them the most effective
workers against the great evil. At present, the slaveholders blind them
to this competition, by keeping alive their prejudice against the
slaves, \emph{as men}---not against them \emph{as slaves}. They appeal
to their pride, often denouncing emancipation, as tending to place the
white working man, on an equality with negroes, and, by this means, they
succeed in drawing off the minds of the poor whites from the real fact,
that, by the rich slave-master, they are already regarded as but a
single remove from equality with the slave. The impression is cunningly
made, that slavery is the only power that can prevent the laboring white
man from falling to the level of the slave's poverty and {}degradation.
To make this enmity deep and broad, between the slave and the poor white
man, the latter is allowed to abuse and whip the former, without
hinderance. But---as I have suggested---this state of facts prevails
\emph{mostly} in the country. In the city of Baltimore, there are not
unfrequent murmurs, that educating the slaves to be mechanics may, in
the end, give slave-masters power to dispense with the services of the
poor white man altogether. But, with characteristic dread of offending
the slaveholders, these poor, white mechanics in Mr. Gardiner's
ship-yard---instead of applying the natural, honest remedy for the
apprehended evil, and objecting at once to work there by the side of
slaves---made a cowardly attack upon the free colored mechanics, saying
\emph{they} were eating the bread which should be eaten by American
freemen, and swearing that they would not work with them. The feeling
was, \emph{really}, against having their labor brought into competition
with that of the colored people at all; but it was too much to strike
directly at the interest of the slaveholders; and, therefore---proving
their servility and cowardice---they dealt their blows on the poor,
colored freeman, and aimed to prevent \emph{him} from serving himself,
in the evening of life, with the trade with which he had served his
master, during the more vigorous portion of his days. Had they succeeded
in driving the black freemen out of the ship yard, they would have
determined also upon the removal of the black slaves. The feeling was
very bitter toward all colored people in Baltimore, about this time,
(1836,) and they---free and slave---suffered all manner of insult and
wrong.

{}Until a very little while before I went there, white and black ship
carpenters worked side by side, in the ship yards of Mr. Gardiner, Mr.
Duncan, Mr. Walter Price, and Mr. Robb. Nobody seemed to see any
impropriety in it. To outward seeming, all hands were well satisfied.
Some of the blacks were first rate workmen, and were given jobs
requiring the highest skill. All at once, however, the white carpenters
knocked off, and swore that they would no longer work on the same stage
with free negroes. Taking advantage of the heavy contract resting upon
Mr. Gardiner, to have the war vessels for Mexico ready to launch in
July, and of the difficulty of getting other hands at that season of the
year, they swore they would not strike another blow for him, unless he
would discharge his free colored workmen.

Now, although this movement did not extend to me, \emph{in form}, it did
reach me, \emph{in fact}. The spirit which it awakened was one of malice
and bitterness, toward colored people \emph{generally}, and I suffered
with the rest, and suffered severely. My fellow apprentices very soon
began to feel it to be degrading to work with me. They began to put on
high looks, and to talk contemptuously and maliciously of "\emph{the
niggers;}" saying, that ``they would take the country,'' that ``they
ought to be killed.'' Encouraged by the cowardly workmen, who, knowing
me to be a slave, made no issue with Mr. Gardiner about my being there,
these young men did their utmost to make it impossible for me to stay.
They seldom called me to do any thing, without coupling the call with a
curse, and, Edward North, the biggest in every thing, rascality
{}included, ventured to strike me, whereupon I picked him up, and threw
him into the dock. Whenever any of them struck me, I struck back again,
regardless of consequences. I could manage any of them \emph{singly;}
and, while I could keep them from combining, I succeeded very well. In
the conflict which ended my stay at Mr. Gardiner's, I was beset by four
of them at once---Ned North, Ned Hays, Bill Stewart, and Tom Humphreys.
Two of them were as large as myself, and they came near killing me, in
broad day light. The attack was made suddenly, and simultaneously. One
came in front, armed with a brick; there was one at each side, and one
behind, and they closed up around me. I was struck on all sides; and,
while I was attending to those in front, I received a blow on my head,
from behind, dealt with a heavy hand-spike. I was completely stunned by
the blow, and fell, heavily, on the ground, among the timbers. Taking
advantage of my fall, they rushed upon me, and began to pound me with
their fists. I let them lay on, for a while, after I came to myself,
with a view of gaining strength. They did me little damage, so far; but,
finally, getting tired of that sport, I gave a sudden surge, and,
despite their weight, I rose to my hands and knees. Just as I did this,
one of their number (I know not which) planted a blow with his boot in
my left eye, which, for a time, seemed to have burst my eyeball. When
they saw my eye completely closed, my face covered with blood, and I
staggering under the stunning blows they had given me, they left me. As
soon as I gathered sufficient strength, I picked up the hand-spike, and,
madly enough, {}attempted to pursue them; but here the carpenters
interfered, and compelled me to give up my frenzied pursuit. It was
impossible to stand against so many.

Dear reader, you can hardly believe the statement, but it is true, and,
therefore, I write it down: not fewer than fifty white men stood by, and
saw this brutal and shameless outrage committed, and not a man of them
all interposed a single word of mercy. There were four against one, and
that one's face was beaten and battered most horribly, and no one said,
``that is enough;'' but some cried out, ``kill him---kill him---kill the
d---d nigger! knock his brains out---he struck a white person.'' I
mention this inhuman outcry, to show the character of the men, and the
spirit of the times, at Gardiner's ship yard, and, indeed, in Baltimore
generally, in 1836. As I look back to this period, I am almost amazed
that I was not murdered outright, in that ship yard, so murderous was
the spirit which prevailed there. On two occasions, while there, I came
near losing my life. I was driving bolts in the hold, through the
keelson, with Hays. In its course, the bolt bent. Hays cursed me, and
said that it was my blow which bent the bolt. I denied this, and charged
it upon him. In a fit of rage he seized an adze, and darted toward me. I
met him with a maul, and parried his blow, or I should have then lost my
life. A son of old Torn Lanman, (the latter's double murder I have
elsewhere charged upon him,) in the spirit of his miserable father, made
an assault upon me, but the blow with his maul missed me. After the
united assault of North, Stewart, Hays and Humphreys, finding that the
{}carpenters were as bitter toward me as the apprentices, and that the
latter were probably set on by the former, I found my only chance for
life was in flight I succeeded in getting away, without an additional
blow. To strike a white man, was death, by Lynch law, in Gardiner's ship
yard; nor was there much of any other law toward colored people, at that
time, in any other part of Maryland. The whole sentiment of Baltimore
was murderous.

After making my escape from the ship yard, I went straight home, and
related the story of the outrage to Master Hugh Auld; and it is due to
him to say, that his conduct---though he was not a religious man---was
every way more humane than that of his brother, Thomas, when I went to
the latter in a somewhat similar plight, from the hands of
"\emph{Brother Edward Covey.}" He listened attentively to my narration
of the circumstances leading to the ruffianly outrage, and gave many
proofs of his strong indignation at what was done. Hugh was a rough, but
manly-hearted fellow, and, at this time, his best nature showed itself.

The heart of my once almost over-kind mistress, Sophia, was again melted
in pity toward me. My puffed-out eye, and my scarred and blood-covered
face, moved the dear lady to tears. She kindly drew a chair by me, and
with friendly, consoling words, she took water, and washed the blood
from my face. No mother's hand could have been more tender than hers.
She bound up my head, and covered my wounded eye with a lean piece of
fresh beef. It was almost compensation for the murderous assault, and
{}my suffering, that it furnished an occasion for the manifestation,
once more, of the originally characteristic kindness of my mistress. Her
affectionate heart was not yet dead, though much hardened by time and by
circumstances.

As for Master Hugh's part, as I have said, he was furious about it; and
he gave expression to his fury in the usual forms of speech in that
locality. He poured curses on the heads of the whole ship yard company,
and swore that he would have satisfaction for the outrage. His
indignation was really strong and healthy; but, unfortunately, it
resulted from the thought that his rights of property, in my person, had
not been respected, more than from any sense of the outrage committed on
me \emph{as a man}. I inferred as much as this, from the fact that he
could, himself, beat and mangle when it suited him to do so. Bent on
having satisfaction, as he said, just as soon as I got a little the
better of my bruises, Master Hugh took me to Esquire Watson's office, on
Bond street, Fell's Point, with a view to procuring the arrest of those
who had assaulted me. He related the outrage to the magistrate, as I had
related it to him, and seemed to expect that a warrant would, at once,
be issued for the arrest of the lawless ruffians.

Mr. Watson heard it all, and instead of drawing up his warrant, he
inquired.---

``Mr. Auld, who saw this assault of which you speak?''

``It was done, sir, in the presence of a ship yard full of hands.''

``Sir,'' said Watson, "I am sorry, but I cannot move {}in this matter
except upon the oath of white witnesses."

``But here's the boy; look at his head and face,'' said the excited
Master Hugh; "\emph{they} show \emph{what} has been done."

But Watson insisted that he was not authorized to do anything, unless
\emph{white} witnesses of the transaction would come forward, and
testify to what had taken place. He could issue no warrant on my word,
against white persons; and, if I had been killed in the presence of a
\emph{thousand blacks}, their testimony, combined, would have been
insufficient to arrest a single murderer. Master Hugh, for once, was
compelled to say, that this state of things was \emph{too bad;} and he
left the office of the magistrate, disgusted.

Of course, it was impossible to get any white man to testify against my
assailants. The carpenters saw what was done; but the actors were but
the agents of their malice, and did only what the carpenters sanctioned.
They had cried, with one accord, "\emph{kill the nigger!" kill the
nigger!}" Even those who may have pitied me, if any such were among
them, lacked the moral courage to come and volunteer their evidence. The
slightest manifestation of sympathy or justice toward a person of color,
was denounced as abolitionism; and the name of abolitionist, subjected
its bearer to frightful liabilities. "D---n \emph{abolitionists}," and
"\emph{Kill the niggers}," were the watch-words of the foul-mouthed
ruffians of those days. Nothing was done, and probably there would not
have been anything done, had I been killed in the affray. The laws and
the morals of the christian city of {}Baltimore, afforded no protection
to the sable denizens of that city.

Master Hugh, on finding he could get no redress for the cruel wrong,
withdrew me from the employment of Mr. Gardiner, and took me into his
own family, Mrs. Auld kindly taking care of me, and dressing my wounds,
until they were healed, and I was ready to go again to work.

While I was on the Eastern Shore, Master Hugh had met with reverses,
which overthrew his business; and he had given up ship building in his
own yard, on the City Block, and was now acting as foreman of Mr. Walter
Price. The best he could now do for me, was to take me into Mr. Price's
yard, and afford me the facilities there, for completing the trade which
I had began to learn at Gardiner's. Here I rapidly became expert in the
use of my calking tools; and, in the course of a single year, I was able
to command the highest wages paid to journeymen calkers in Baltimore.

The reader will observe that I was now of some pecuniary value to my
master. During the busy season, I was bringing six and seven dollars per
week. I have, sometimes, brought him as much as nine dollars a week, for
the wages were a dollar and a half per day.

After learning to calk, I sought my own employment, made my own
contracts, and collected my own earnings; giving Master Hugh no trouble
in any part of the transactions to which I was a party.

Here, then, were better days for the Eastern Shore \emph{slave}. I was
now free from the vexatious assaults of {}the apprentices at Mr.
Gardiner's; and free from the perils of plantation life, and once more
in a favorable condition to increase my little stock of education, which
had been at a dead stand since my removal from Baltimore. I had, on the
Eastern Shore, been only a teacher, when in company with other slaves,
but now there were colored persons who could instruct me. Many of the
young calkers could read, write and cipher. Some of them had high
notions about mental improvement; and the free ones, on Fell's Point,
organized what they called the "\emph{East Baltimore Mental Improvement
Society.}" To this society, notwithstanding it was intended that only
free persons should attach themselves, I was admitted, and was, several
times, assigned a prominent part in its debates. I owe much to the
society of these young men.

The reader already knows enough of the \emph{ill} effects of good
treatment on a slave, to anticipate what was now the case in my improved
condition. It was not long before I began to show signs of disquiet with
slavery, and to look around for means to get out of that condition by
the shortest route. I was living among \emph{freemen;} and was, in all
respects, equal to them by nature and by attainments. \emph{Why should I
be a slave?} There was \emph{no} reason why I should be the thrall of
any man.

Besides, I was now getting---as I have said---a dollar and fifty cents
per day. I contracted for it, worked for it, earned it, collected it; it
was paid to me, and it was \emph{rightfully} my own; and yet, upon every
returning Saturday night, this money---my {}own hard earnings, every
cent of it---was demanded of me, and taken from me by Master Hugh. He
did not earn it; he had no hand in earning it; why, then, should he have
it? I owed him nothing. He had given me no schooling, and I had received
from him only my food and raiment; and for these, my services were
supposed to pay, from the first. The right to take my earnings, was the
right of the robber. He had the power to compel me to give him the
fruits of my labor, and this power was his only right in the case. I
became more and more dissatisfied with this state of things; and, in so
becoming, I only gave proof of the same human nature which every reader
of this chapter in my life---slaveholder, or non-slaveholder---is
conscious of possessing.

To make a contented slave, you must make a thoughtless one. It is
necessary to darken his moral and mental vision, and, as far as
possible, to annihilate his power of reason. He must be able to detect
no inconsistencies in slavery. The man that takes his earnings, must be
able to convince him that he has a perfect right to do so. It must not
depend upon mere force; the slave must know no Higher Law than his
master's will. The whole relationship must not only demonstrate, to his
mind, its necessity, but its absolute rightfulness. If there be one
crevice through which a single drop can fall, it will certainly rust off
the slave's chain.
