{\protect\hypertarget{357}{}{}}

~

{CHAPTER XXIII.}

INTRODUCED TO THE ABOLITIONISTS.

{FIRST SPEECH AT NANTUCKET---MUCH SENSATION---{EXTRAORDITARY} SPEECH OF
MR. GARRISON---AUTHOR BECOMES A PUBLIC LECTURER---FOURTEEN YEARS'
EXPERIENCE---YOUTHFUL ENTHUSIASM---A BRAND NEW FACT---MATTER OF THE
AUTHOR'S SPEECH---HE COULD NOT FOLLOW THE PROGRAMME---HIS FUGITIVE
SLAVESHIP DOUBTED---TO SETTLE ALL DOUBT HE WRITES HIS EXPERIENCE OF
SLAVERY---DANGER OF RECAPTURE INCREASED.}

\textsc{In} the summer of 1841, a grand anti-slavery convention was held
in Nantucket, under the auspices of Mr. Garrison and his friends. Until
now, I had taken no holiday since my escape from slavery. Having worked
very hard that spring and summer, in Richmond's brass
foundery---sometimes working all night as well as all day---and needing
a day or two of rest, I attended this convention, never supposing that I
should take part in the proceedings. Indeed, I was not aware that any
one connected with the convention even so much as knew my name. I was,
however, quite mistaken. Mr. William C. Coffin, a prominent abolitionist
in those days of trial, had heard me speaking to my colored friends, in
the little school-house on Second street, New Bedford, where we
worshiped. He sought me out in the crowd, and invited me to say a few
words to the convention. Thus sought out, and thus invited, I was
induced to speak {\protect\hypertarget{358}{}{}}out the feelings
inspired by the occasion, and the fresh recollection of the scenes
through which I had passed as a slave. My speech on this occasion is
about the only one I ever made, of which I do not remember a single
connected sentence. It was with the utmost difficulty that I could stand
erect, or that I could command and articulate two words without
hesitation and stammering. I trembled in every limb. I am not sure that
my embarrassment was not the most effective part of my speech, if speech
it could be called. At any rate, this is about the only part of my
performance that I now distinctly remember. But excited and convulsed as
I was, the audience, though remarkably quiet before, became as much
excited as myself. Mr. Garrison followed me, taking me as his text; and
now, whether I had made an eloquent speech in behalf of freedom or not,
his was one never to be forgotten by those who heard it. Those who had
heard Mr. Garrison oftenest, and had known him longest, were astonished.
It was an effort of unequaled power, sweeping down, like a very tornado,
every opposing barrier, whether of sentiment or opinion. For a moment,
he possessed that almost fabulous inspiration, often referred to but
seldom attained, in which a public meeting is transformed, as it were,
into a single individuality---the orator wielding a thousand heads and
hearts at once, and by the simple majesty of his all controlling
thought, converting his hearers into the express image of his own soul.
That night there were at least one thousand Garrisonians in Nantucket!
At the close of this great meeting, I was duly waited on by
{\protect\hypertarget{359}{}{}}Mr. John A. Collins---then the general
agent of the Massachusetts anti-slavery society---and urgently solicited
by him to become an agent of that society, and to publicly advocate its
anti-slavery principles. I was reluctant to take the proffered position.
I had not been quite three years from slavery---was honestly distrustful
of my ability---wished to be excused; publicity exposed me to discovery
and arrest by my master; and other objections came up, but Mr. Collins
was not to be put off, and I finally consented to go out for three
months, for I supposed that I should have got to the end of my story and
my usefulness, in that length of time.

Here opened upon me a new life---a life for which I had had no
preparation. I was a ``graduate from the peculiar institution,'' Mr.
Collins used to say, when introducing me, "\emph{with my diploma written
on my back!}" The three years of my freedom had been spent in the hard
school of adversity. My hands had been furnished by nature with
something like a solid leather coating, and I had bravely marked out for
myself a life of rough labor, suited to the hardness of my hands, as a
means of supporting myself and rearing my children.

Now what shall I say of this fourteen years' experience as a public
advocate of the cause of my enslaved brothers and sisters? The time is
but as a speck, yet large enough to justify a pause for
retrospection---and a pause it must only be.

Young, ardent, and hopeful, I entered upon this new life in the full
gush of unsuspecting enthusiasm. The cause was good; the men engaged in
it were {\protect\hypertarget{360}{}{}}good; the means to attain its
triumph, good; Heaven's blessing must attend all, and freedom must soon
be given to the pining millions under a ruthless bondage. My whole heart
went with the holy cause, and my most fervent prayer to the Almighty
Disposer of the hearts of men, were continually offered for its early
triumph. ``Who or what,'' thought I, ``can withstand a cause so good, so
holy, so indescribably glorious. The God of Israel is with us. The might
of the Eternal is on our side. Now let but the truth be spoken, and a
nation will start forth at the sound!'' In this enthusiastic spirit, I
dropped into the ranks of freedom's friends, and went forth to the
battle. For a time I was made to forget that my skin was dark and my
hair crisped. For a time I regretted that I could not have shared the
hardships and dangers endured by the earlier workers for the slave's
release. I soon, however, found that my enthusiasm had been extravagant;
that hardships and dangers were not yet passed; and that the life now
before me, had shadows as well as sunbeams.

Among the first duties assigned me, on entering the ranks, was to
travel, in company with Mr. George Foster, to secure subscribers to the
``Anti-slavery Standard'' and the ``Liberator.'' With him I traveled and
lectured through the eastern counties of Massachusetts. Much interest
was awakened---large meetings assembled. Many came, no doubt, from
curiosity to hear what a negro could say in his own cause. I was
generally introduced as a "\emph{chattel}``---a ''\emph{thing}``---a
piece of southern ''\emph{property}"---the chairman assuring the
audience that \emph{it} could speak.
{\protect\hypertarget{361}{}{}}Fugitive slaves, at that time, were not
so plentiful as now; and as a fugitive slave lecturer, I had the
advantage of being a "\emph{brand new fact}"---the first one out. Up to
that time, a colored man was deemed a fool who confessed himself a
runaway slave, not only because of the danger to which he exposed
himself of being retaken, but because it was a confession of a very
\emph{low} origin! Some of my colored friends in New Bedford thought
very badly of my wisdom for thus exposing and degrading myself. The only
precaution I took, at the beginning, to prevent Master Thomas from
knowing where I was, and what I was about, was the withholding my former
name, my master's name, and the name of the state and county from which
I came. During the first three or four months, my speeches were almost
exclusively made up of narrations of my own personal experience as a
slave. ``Let us have the facts,'' said the people. So also said Friend
George Foster, who always wished to pin me down to my simple narrative.
``Give us the facts,'' said Collins, ``we will take care of the
philosophy.'' Just here arose some embarrassment. It was impossible for
me to repeat the same old story month after month, and to keep up my
interest in it. It was new to the people, it is true, but it was an old
story to me; and to go through with it night after night, was a task
altogether too mechanical for my nature. ``Tell your story, Frederick,''
would whisper my then revered friend, William Lloyd Garrison, as I
stepped upon the platform. I could not always obey, for I was now
reading and thinking. New views of the subject were presented to my
mind. It {\protect\hypertarget{362}{}{}}did not entirely satisfy me to
\emph{narrate} wrongs; I felt like \emph{denouncing} them. I could not
always curb my moral indignation for the perpetrators of slaveholding
villainy, long enough for a circumstantial statement of the facts which
I felt almost everybody must know. Besides, I was growing, and needed
room. ``People won't believe you ever was a slave, Frederick, if you
keep on this way,'' said Friend Foster. ``Be yourself,'' said Collins,
``and tell your story.'' It was said to me, "Better have a \emph{little}
of the plantation manner of speech than not; 'tis not best that you seem
too learned." These excellent friends were actuated by the best of
motives, and were not altogether wrong in their advice; and still I must
speak just the word that seemed to \emph{me} the word to be spoken
\emph{by} me.

At last the apprehended trouble came. People doubted if I had ever been
a slave. They said I did not talk like a slave, look like a slave, nor
act like a slave, and that they believed I had never been south of Mason
and Dixon's line. ``He don't tell us where he came from---what his
master's name was---how he got away---nor the story of his experience.
Besides, he is educated, and is, in this, a contradiction of all the
facts we have concerning the ignorance of the slaves.'' Thus, I was in a
pretty fair way to be denounced as an impostor. The committee of the
Massachusetts anti-slavery society knew all the facts in my case, and
agreed with me in the prudence of keeping them private. They, therefore,
never doubted my being a genuine fugitive; but going down the aisles of
the churches in which I spoke, and hearing the
{\protect\hypertarget{363}{}{}}free spoken Yankees saying, repeatedly,
"\emph{He's never been a slave, I'll warrant ye,}" I resolved to dispel
all doubt, at no distant day, by such a revelation of facts as could not
be made by any other than a genuine fugitive.

In a little less than four years, therefore, after becoming a public
lecturer, I was induced to write out the leading facts connected with my
experience in slavery, giving names of persons, places, and dates---thus
putting it in the power of any who doubted, to ascertain the truth or
falsehood of my story of being a fugitive slave. This statement soon
became known in Maryland, and I had reason to believe that an effort
would be made to recapture me.

It is not probable that any open attempt to secure me as a slave could
have succeeded, further than the obtainment, by my master, of the money
value of my bones and sinews. Fortunately for me, in the four years of
my labors in the abolition cause, I had gained many friends, who would
have suffered themselves to be taxed to almost any extent to save me
from slavery. It was felt that I had committed the double offense of
running away, and exposing the secrets and crimes of slavery and
slaveholders. There was a double motive for seeking my
reënslavement---avarice and vengeance; and while, as I have said, there
was little probability of successful recapture, if attempted openly, I
was constantly in danger of being spirited away, at a moment when my
friends could render me no assistance. In traveling about from place to
place---often alone---I was much exposed to this sort of attack. Any one
cherishing the {\protect\hypertarget{364}{}{}}design to betray me, could
easily do so, by simply tracing my whereabouts through the anti-slavery
journals, for my meetings and movements were promptly made known in
advance. My true friends, Mr. Garrison and Mr. Phillips, had no faith in
the power of Massachusetts to protect me in my right to liberty. Public
sentiment and the law, in their opinion, would hand me over to the
tormentors. Mr. Phillips, especially, considered me in danger, and said,
when I showed him the manuscript of my story, if in my place, he would
throw it into the fire. Thus, the reader will observe, the settling of
one difficulty only opened the way for another; and that though I had
reached a free state, and had attained a position for public usefulness,
I was still tormented with the liability of losing my liberty. How this
liability was dispelled, will be related, with other incidents, in the
next chapter.
